.TH TERMUX\-ROOTFS 1 "October 2017" "termux\-basics" "Termux RootFS"

.SH NAME
termux\-rootfs \- an advanced prefixed root file system for Termux

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTermux\-RootFS is an advanced prefixed root file system for \fBTermux\fR(1). It is based on regular
packages from official Termux repository but also it has a significant differences.

.SH DIFFERENCES FROM REGULAR TERMUX
.PP
There are several differences from regular Termux:
.RS 2
.IP \(bu 4
Static root file system architecture. This means that there are not split between packages and everything
works as monolithic system. But there is drawbacks as more complicated maintenance.
.IP \(bu 4
Advanced software that possibly will never been available in official Termux repository.
.IP \(bu 4
Some of software is preconfigured and usable 'out\-of\-box'.
.IP \(bu 4
There are a password login protection. So you can set a password with command \fBpasswd\fR(8) and on starting
session you will need to enter a password.
.RE

.SH POST\-INSTALLATION
.PP
If you are reading this manual, then you have replaced your Termux prefix with Termux\-RootFS. But you need to do
some post\-installation steps.
.PP
Firstly, make sure that there will no be problems with default shell:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBrm\fR \-f \fI~/.termux/shell\fR
.RE
.PP
Then you need to run an automatic configurator (note that it may ask your interaction):
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBtermux\-setup\-rootfs\fR
.RE
.PP
After configuring, restart Termux. When you open a new session, there may be either a password prompt if you enabled
password login protection when you run \fBtermux\-setup\-rootfs\fR, or there may be just displayed \fRmotd\fI and started
shell.
.PP
You may want to use \fBzsh\fR(1) as your default shell:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBchsh\fR \-s zsh
.RE
.PP
Also there are highly recommended that you will install modded \fBTermux.apk\fR (includes Termux:Boot, Termux:Styling,
Termux:Widget addons) and \fBTermuxAPI.apk\fR that are located in directory:
.PP
.RS 2
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/termux\-rootfs\fR
.RE
.PP
Note that if you are using an original Termux applications there will be a possibility of bypassing of password login
with a \fIfailsafe\fR shell.

.SH USING TERMUX\-ROOTFS
.PP
\fB1. RUNNING SERVERS AND DAEMONS\fR
.br
.RS 3
There a simple service manager is available. For more information see \fBservice\-manager\fR(8).
.PP
To list available services you can type in terminal:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBservice\fR list
.RE
.PP
This command should print a list of available services with short description for each service.
.PP
Here is example of starting the \fBnginx\fR(8):
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBservice\fR nginx start
.br
== Checking Nginx configuration... OK
.br
== Starting Nginx... OK
.RE
.PP
Some services have an additional configuration files that stored in directory:
.PP
.RS 2
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/etc/conf.d\fR
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2. COMPILING SOFTWARE FROM SOURCES\fR
.RS 3
There are some common formats of source code tree that are may be used in various applications. But these
formats are designed to be used in regular operating systems (not in Termux!).
.PP
Before compiling software, ensure that \fBtermux\-exec\fR is enabled:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBtermux\-exec\fR enable
.RE
.PP
Or
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBexport\fR LD_PRELOAD=${PREFIX}/lib/libtermux\-exec.so
.br
$ \fBexec\fR ${SHELL}
.RE
.PP
Also before building project you need to read notes about that project. Search for files \fIREADME\fR,
\fIREADME.txt\fR, \fIREADME.md\fR, \fIINSTALL\fR, \fINOTES\fR or such. The information from these files may
help you in building the software.
.PP
\fB2.1 BUILDING MAKEFILE BASED PROJECT\fR
.RS 4
If you found in source directory root a file named \fIMakefile\fR or \fIGNUmakefile\fR, then for compiling you need to
run command:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBmake\fR
.RE
.PP
Sometimes you need to set a compiler and flags. You can specify them as \fBmake\fR arguments:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBmake\fR CC="clang" CFLAGS="\-O3" LDFLAGS="\-lmylib"
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2.2 BUILDING A GNU PROJECT\fR
.RS 4
The most common Open Source projects (for example \fBcoreutils\fR(1)) are using a GNU build system. Before compiling you will
need to run a configuration script. Make sure that you are enabled \fBtermux\-exec\fR or you are running under \fBtermux\-chroot\fR(1),
if not, then you may get errors about missing files.
.PP
Configuring project for Termux:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fB./configure\fR \-\-prefix="${PREFIX}" CC="clang" CXX="clang++"
.RE
.PP
After configuring you need to run \fBmake\fR(1):
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBmake\fR \-j4
.RE
.PP
If \fBconfigure\fR script cannot guess your system type, then you should update scripts \fBconfig.sub\fR and \fBconfig.guess\fR
by running command:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBupdate\-config\-guess\fR
.RE
.PP
If this not work, copy scripts from directory
.PP
.RS 2
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/libtool/build-aux\fR
.RE
.PP
Sometimes the configure script is missing. You can install it with command:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBautoreconf\fR \-i
.RE
.PP
Also if \fIautogen.sh\fR script is present, you can use it:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fB./autogen.sh\fR
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2.3 BUILDING CMAKE PROJECT\fR
.RS 4
If you found in project root a file \fICMakeLists.txt\fR then this is a \fBcmake\fR project and you can build it
by running command:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBmkdir\fR build
.br
$ \fBcd\fR build
.br
$ \fBcmake\fR .. && \fBmake\fR \-j4
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2.4 BUILDING A PYTHON PROJECT\fR
.RS 4
Most of \fBpython\fR(1) projects can be installed from PyPI repository with \fBpip\fR. The \fBpip\fR can also build and
install projects from source:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBcd\fR src
.br
$ \fBpip\fR install .
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2.5 INSTALLING COMPILED SOFTWARE\fR
.RS 4
In \fBTermux\-RootFS\fR it's recommended to install package in temporary directory and then move installed files to the
rootfs so you can check if the installed binary may overwrite the one that already present.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBmake\fR install DESTDIR=${HOME}/installation
.br
$ \fBcd\fR ${HOME}/installation/bin
.br
$ \fBmv\fR \-i * ${PREFIX}/bin
.RE
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB3. INSTALLING ADDITIONAL SOFTWARE WITH APT OR DPKG\fR
.RS 3
It is possible to install a software from official Termux repository that is not present in
\fBTermux\-RootFS\fR. Make sure that this software is not have collisions with \fBTermux\-RootFS\fR.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBapt\fR update
.br
$ \fBapt\fR install php
.RE
.PP
You can also install a *.deb package with \fBdpkg\fR(1):
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBdpkg\fR \-i mypackage.deb
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB4. SEARCHING FOR INSTALLED SOFTWARE\fR
.RS 3
Sometimes you will need to find an application that is suitable for your needs.
.PP
For example you want to find programs that works with *.apk files:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBapropos\fR "apk"
.br
apksigner(1) - APK signing tool
.br
apktool(1) - disassemble Android application
.br
buildapk(1) - build and sign APK file
.RE
.PP
Also you should check the section 'Available software' in the \fIREADME.txt\fR that should be located in the
your \fI${PREFIX}\fR.

.SH OTHER TIPS AND TRICKS
.PP
\fB1. PREVENTING DEVICE FROM SLEEP
.RS 3
This is useful for example when you are using \fISSH\fR or other network services. This will prevent Android OS
from starting a Dose mode and will increase performance of the network connections.
.PP
There are several methods to do this but before perfoming these methods you should enable wakelock:
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBtermux\-wake\-lock\fR
.RE
.PP
Of course, your battery charge will be drained faster.
.PP
\fB1.1 ALWAYS ON DISPLAY\fR
.RS 4
This method is simple and should always work. If you are using a modded Termux application that provided with
\fBTermux\-RootFS\fR then you can start settings menu by long click on terminal display and enable option
'Keep screen on'. If you are using an original Termux application, then you need to check settings of your
Android OS.
.RE
.PP
\fB1.2 NETWORK TETHERING MODE\fB
.RS 4
Another simple method is enabling network tethering mode via USB or Wi\-Fi. Just open your Android OS settings and click
to enable mobile hotspot. This will prevent CPU from sleep and starting Dose mode but Wi\-Fi hotspot will drain battery
quickly.
.RE
.PP
\fB1.3 PING SESSION\fR
.RS 4
This method is more advanced and tested only on Android 6.0. You need to start a separate session with \fBabduco\fR(1) or
\fBtmux\fR(1) and have \fBtermux\-wake\-lock\fR enabled.
.PP
Example with \fBabduco\fR(1):
.PP
.RS 2
$ \fBabduco\fR -n netping ping -i 0.3 -s 0 192.168.1.1
.RE
.PP
In above example every 0.3 second the ping packet will be sent to the Wi\-Fi router (with IP 192.168.1.1).
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB2. BROWSING INTERNET ANONYMOUSLY WITH BLOCKING ADS
.RS 3
There is a way of turning TOR SOCKS proxy into adblock by mapping target hostnames to localhost as \fBtor\fR(1) blocks
arbitrary connections to local addresses.
.PP
Example of blocking domain in \fItorrc\fR:
.PP
.RS 2
MapAddress *.doubleclick.net 127.0.0.1
.RE
.PP
The above line will block \fIdoubleclick.net\fR and all it's subdomains. \fBTermux\-RootFS\fR has a preconfigured
\fItorrc\fR which blocks more than 8500 domains of ads and trackers and all subdomains of these ones.
.PP
To enable adblock go to directory \fI${PREFIX}/etc/tor\fR and edit file \fItorrc\fR. Find and uncomment line that includes
file \fI${PREFIX}/etc/tor/addons/adblock.torrc\fR, then restart the \fBtor\fR(1) service if it is running.
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fIPREFIX\fR
.br
This environment variable points to the prefixed root file system of Termux.

.SH FILES
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc\fR
.br
There are located documents for various applications.
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/examples\fR
.br
There are located examples for various applications.
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/termux-rootfs/Termux.apk\fR
.br
The modded Termux application.
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/termux-rootfs/TermuxAPI.apk\fR
.br
The modded Termux:API application.
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/termux-rootfs/patches\fR
.br
In this directory located patches that was applied for various applications in \fBTermux\-RootFS\fR.
.TP
\fI/data/data/com.termux/files/usr/share/doc/termux-rootfs/sources\fR
.br
In this directory located sources for some applications in \fBTermux\-RootFS\fR and sources for
\fBTermux.apk\fR and \fBTermuxAPI.apk\fR.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
This manpage and \fBtermux\-rootfs\fR are created by Leonid Plyushch <leonid.plyushch@gmail.com>.
.PP
The programs, scripts and documentation that used in \fBtermux\-rootfs\fR are belong to theirs developers and maintainers.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR intro (1),
.BR login (8),
.BR termux (1).
